Its interesting to see a Nyers take on Miami after living here for 10 years. They really fundamentally don't understand what is happening here. Miami is becoming a global city with very interesting new cultural institutions and a vibrant intellectual class . If you live in NYC or other older cities all those institutions have been built by your grandparents or great grandparents so you can't fathom what your city was like before the MET or Lincoln Center or Museum of Natural History and the struggles their founders had to create them. That is where Miami is today.  Miami is starting to have true cultural bedrock and it will probably take another 5 years for NYC reporters even from the Grey Lady to understand the implications of these changes. Miami love it or hate it embodies the future of the US a Latin multi cultural city that has a important place at the table. <br/><br/>On a side note Miami has better weather than NYC (We all can be washed away by storms apparently) great food, excellent business opportunities, and intellectual people. It was Woolworth's on Lincoln Road, not Kmart. This still does a poor job of truly explaining Miami. There is no "cafe au lait" in Miami. This is not Algeria, and we had no French colonists. Exiled Cubans brought "cafe con leche" here. There is not a big difference, but you ought to get the name right.<br/><br/>Hofbrau is a tacky German restaurant on a main tourist strip. Espanola Way is also another tourist trap. I've lived here nearly a half decade and haven't been once. South Beach Wine and Food Festival isn't called "SoBeFest" it's on social media as SoBeWFF. Its website is sobewff.com. Way to fact check.<br/><br/>Your so called jaunt around the "real Miami" is just as superficial as the New Yorkers who come down during Art Basel only to eat at places created for them.What about the Versailles on Calle Ocho?  Still there?  Still worth it?  Give us some prime Cuban restaurants (not over done) to check out... thanks.Ahhh Miami, the place where I was born and the good times I've had there. Just an interesting note being a Miami Dolphin fan. Go to any Miami game that plays against NY Jets or NY Giants and you will probable see more New York fans than Miami. I must admit I have met a lot of NYer's and they are great people - lov ya. Come and visit Miami anytime and enjoy ALL that Miami has to offer. And please I know this article is about Miami but Fort Lauderdale is just down the road and it too has much to offer. We go to Alabama Jack's for one thing: the smoked fish. Best we have ever had. Order it with saltines, mustard and japalenos. Pile it all together and...mmmmm. If we get it to-go, the container is empty before we get out of the Keys. Most everything is terrific there, especially the conch fritters, but the smoked fish is worth the trip alone - that and a cold Kalik or El Presidente.Funny.  As a coral gables native, I too am having fun imagining the reaction. Imagine if Scarsdale was told it was lushly decayed...<br/><br/>Not a bad article, but always amusing to read New Yorker takes on Miami.   It never would have occurred to me to look for a restaurant where pubbelly is, though. I will check it out.  I'm a bit dubious Alabama jacks is worth the drive....  (For most...  I certainly wouldn't drive that far to end up there)This is a sterile account of Miami that reminds me of the bumper stickers I used to see in the early 1980's  -  "Will the last American leaving Miami please bring the flag?".  Although there are a few token nods to Latin influence (Puerto Saguna !?!?) it paints an incomplete picture of the Miami experience.  As a tourist you could certainly have her experience, but it would be the neon-K-mart-News Cafe-Pink Flamingo experience of bad travel brochures and overplayed S. Florida stereotypes.  <br/><br/>Homestead is fine, but it is an island of pre-1960's Miami residents; a safe haven for northerners who are not yet as comfortable experiencing multiculturalism as they are talking about it.  <br/><br/>Venture to Coral Gables, Coconut Grove, Brickell, Key Biscayne, and God-forbid, Hialeah or Miami Lakes.  Visit El Palacio de los Jugos on Flagler St. for the original fruit smoothie, invented long before the word 'smoothie' came along and with a greater array of fruits than even the best-stocked Whole Foods.  While you're at it make sure you take in 8th St. on a Friday night and stop in at Casa Juancho where you can see virile 70 year old men charming women in their 60's in old-world gentlemanly style.  It's a spectacle worth seeing at least once before you die.  Loved the article. I'm putting Alabama Jack's on my itinerary this summer.<br/>Only wish I could be there now!Oh, Liesel, Liesel, Liesel...Looking over your shoulder to make sure the NYC foodies and fashionistas approve of your "going off the beaten path"?  South Beach is our game preserve for preening, entitled New Yorkers who  know what's hot.  We don't care.  Your call on Coral Gables is so wrong.  It's beautiful, with lots of character, and we who  frolicked as kids in Venetian Pool with its grottos and diving rocks, still fed by fresh-water springs, will never forget it.  Take history walks with Dr. Paul George, read up on our history with Arva Moore Parks, walk North Beach, Buena Vista,  North Miami (don't miss the Museum of Contemporary Art there "MOCA NoMi" with its eclectic, wacky shows and events in its neon-lit patio), Little Haiti, and Little Havana.   In season stop for fresh strawberries,  shakes and fresh baked goods at Burr's in the Redlands.  Find little middle eastern and Greek places in the Roads area west of Brickell.  As to food, our Mango Gang  chefs are still cooking the eclectic Caribbean influenced menus that you don't find elsewhere, --Allen Susser, Michele Bernstein, Douglas Rodriguez, Norman van Aiken and others.  Try  sailing on Biscayne Bay... easy small-boat sailing, even for amateurs, to enjoy our breezes and beautiful water.   Miami City Ballet's informal "Open Barre" performances...lower cost events in their beautiful rehearsal space.  Try the new park at New World Symphony for free projection, with great sound, of the live orchestra performances.  Every time I think how ridiculous the nyt is, it publishes a piece as outstanding as this.  Thanks Liesl!The author's memory of an anhinga spearing a fish by diving into the water with a great splash is faulty. Anhingas don't do it that way -- they swim under water, spear a small fish on their beaks, then surface and flip the fish into the air so that it comes down head first. Then they climb into a tree to dry their wings and keep warm. Perhaps the author remembers an osprey, which does dive to catch (much larger) fish?Miami is so alluring: Art Basel, Marlins, Dolphins, Heat, the Boat Show, the Book Fair, symphony, ballet, opera, great bands and entertainment for all ages, beaches and parks on the ocean and that only touches the surface. Try a boat ride south from Key Biscayne to islands with parks only available by boat. Or take in the islands Presidents and tycoons and investment bankers escaped to years ago. Plan your trip to Miami around your cultural preferences. And then just go from there. I enjoyed the article...living here everyday, South Beach is a surreal place that a person sometimes sits and can't believe they live. Lots of behind the scene, things happen on the beach. Things that are kept out of the news to keep the tourist  coming.<br/>But other than that it's lovely, the coolest thing I would say a bout SB is friends and family come down every without fail 2 to 3 weeks happy and wanting to take us dinner. This is how a SB resident can eat at all of the finest eateries on the beach and through Miami for little or nothing. stunning place, glad I live here.You left out the reasonably priced and really excellent 11th street diner, as well as Pink, south of fifth. Cute hippie shop on Espanola Way.... We spend many hours walking the beach-park around the southern tip of SB.<br/>Re hotels, we rent apartments via Homeaway.com. For $225 a night you can sometimes get a 2 bedroom condo on the beach with a kitchen. Rent bikes and ride to downtown Miami.<br/>Went to Robert Is Here for the first time this year. What a trip.<br/>Don't forget the town of Coconut Grove.<br/>Hang out at the beach.<br/>Ten or more trips...never needed either crowded bars or overpriced restaurants.But of course!  This is for real and what Liesl makes light of is not what Miami really is.   Write on!I visit very often.... the airboat rides along the 41 are amazing... even hardened, seen it all before travellers smile... and yes, you can take your ear defenders off.... the knowledge of the boatsmen is awesome.... and how ever many times you go, there is something different to see...... much the same as Miami.... its a bit like "if you tire of Miami, you tire of life"...... go after April when the snowbirds go home, and you will have time, sidewalk space and wonderful weather to enjoy.   <br/><br/>Everglade City is also worth a look.<br/><br/>Be prepared for oven like heat when you step into the street from the Airport.... the traffic, humidity and vibrancy hit you like no where else I find.... head quickly for the beaches or the 41.... enjoy!Thanks, Liesl, for turning people on to the real Miami and South Florida in general. Forget the trendies, hipsters and old-money fossils. What this place is really all about is a crazy mix of the Caribbean, Latin America and the steamiest, funkiest parts of the South, tossed together as a kind of kaleidoscopic cultural salad complete with 'gators, odd birds, a double dose of summer and a lot of Spanish thrown in. It's a wild, bizarre stew unlike anything else on this sun-orbiting rock. I've been here over 20 years and still learn something new each day - sometimes good, sometimes bad, but all of it real.Gotta say .... Why did u come to Miami then ???? So you fly from the cold northeast to see swamps !!!!! I can never figure out the fascination with people with the Everglades !!!!!!! Yes !!!! You come to Miami for the nightlife !!! Yes !!!!!! You come  to Miami for the beach and fun in the sun !!! Our restaurant's and hotels might not be as famous and might not have Michelin stars ... But Prime112, LIV night club, the Delano hotel can go toe to toe with any place not only in Manhattan but in the world !!!!!  But you choose to go to the Everglades to see what ??? Birds, to get bitten by Mosquitos and to see an occasional alligator ( granted there cool to see in the wild) .... I was born and raised in Miami and wouldn't trade it for any other city ... NYC is awesome don't get me wrong .... But Miami is famous for everything that is taboo around the rest of the US ..... And by telling the readers oh I prefer to see swamps instead of saying ... The beaches are awesome and the weather rocks in February is a big injustice to your readers !!!!!  I lived in South Beach for years and now live in Manhattan and let me clarify something: South Beach is NOT a "walking town." The only thoroughfares which are fit for walking are Ocean Drive, Collins Ave, Washington Ave, &amp; Lincoln Road. And if you are a local, you will skip Ocean, because it is too touristy, not walk on Collins, because it has been reduced to mall stores, and only walk on Washington when you are going out to clubs. Otherwise you will only consistently walk on Lincoln. The other streets are mainly residential, and do not compare to walking residential streets in Manhattan. In South Beach, there is no there there, and getting bored while walking is a given. The streets seem endless and it's for 6 months of the year it's too hot to walk long distances.<br/>The only smart ways to do South Beach are by bicycle or moped, or for the most adventurous-skateboard . Otherwise, be prepared to be let down.I lives in South Beach for and now live in Manhattan and let me clarify something:  South Beach is NOT a "walking town."  The only thoroughfares which are fit for walking are Ocean Drive, Collins Ave, Washington Ave, &amp; Lincoln Road.  And if you are a local, you will skip Ocean, because it is too touristy, not walk on Collins, because it has been reduced to mall stores, and only walk on Washington when you are going out to clubs. Otherwise you will only consistently walk on Lincoln.  The other streets are mainly residential, and do not compare to walking residential streets in Manhattan.  In South Beach, there is no there there, and getting bored while walking is a given.  The streets seem endless and it's for 6 months of the year it's too hot to walk long distances.<br/>The only smart ways to do South Beach are by bicycle or moped, or for the most adventurous-skateboard .  Otherwise, be prepared to be let down.1. It's not all Miami! Florida City is Florida City, not Miami. Coral Gables is not "a lushly decayed residential neighborhood," it's an affluent township.  We do not call everything in Dade County Miami.  <br/><br/>2. South Beach is a walking city... No bigger lie has ever been told. There is not a local who walks anywhere, ever. We are on bicycles, scooters and motorcycles or in a car, but never on our feet. Only tourist from up North walk around here. Also, (back to point 1) we don't separate South Beach from Miami Beach. We simply refer to the area as The Beach.  <br/><br/>3. Joes. I love it. So does 3 generations of Americans who have ever set foot in Miami Beach. Why would you possible feel compelled to write about eating there in this article? If you want to write about Joe's from a local perspective, you get your crab at the take. I eat from Joe's once a week, but have only eaten inside when out of towners insist on their ignorance and win out over what we know to be better. <br/><br/>3. Nothing on Ocean Drive is local, charming or intriguing, this goes for Espanola Way as well. News Cafe is among the things that all locals detest the most, as we remember a time when it was special.... 15 years ago. Where did the NYT travel guides go?  They were awesome!Like you, I have visited Miami many times, but live here now for the second time. I live here because I love Miami, and South Florida in general. Having spent over 20 years in the northeast, I appreciate, identify and welcome its influence on Miami. Yet Miami is much more than NY with palm trees. You can try to knock Art Basel and SoBe Wine &amp; Food Festival; but in a fair shake, these have developed into a couple of the largest events of their kind, worldwide, as are the Miami International Boat Show, and Ultra Music Festival.<br/>Miami &amp; Miami Beach have done an extraordinary job in reinventing themselves from their murky 80's past to a vibrant, diverse, beautiful city that attracts people from all over the world. The Latin culture in Miami is not exclusively Cuban in spite of history; it is Brazilian, Peruvian, Chilean, Colombian, Venezuelan and representative to some degree of each of the 20-plus countries in the region. You also find people from all walks of life and places in the world. Europeans, Asians, Africans, Middle Easterners, Australians, you can find them here.<br/>Miami caters to a wide range of interests. If you are looking for cache here, you will probably not find it on Ocean Drive or Lincoln Road. As the word itself implies, it's a lot more subtle than that, and it requires a little more patience. I market Real Estate in Miami to the world and I can tell you there?s a lot more to the place than a few visits will uncover. Look me up, I?ll show you around next time!To start, you don't need to overthink to eat extremely well in Miami. You also don't need to spend a fortune, or dine only on crab and key lime pie. While you have managed to hit a few of the good restaurants, there are so many others... Try Harry's, Joey's, Jimmy'z Kitchen, Ceviche 105, Pollos y Jarras, Yardbird's, Burger &amp; Beer Joint, Joe's Take Away, Fratelli La Buffala, The River Oyster Bar, City Hall, The Federal, Blue Collar, Sugarcane -- to name a just few and not even going as far as Coconut Grove or Coral Gables. None of these are offensively expensive and they offer original, eclectic and very tasty fare.<br/><br/>With that, there are those who enjoy something more upscale; and Miami has that to offer as well. It costs more, but we have the likes of Nobu, Hakkasan, 1500, Ago, Phillipe Chow, Michael's Genuine, Michy's and literally dozens of other offerings. You can't knock those places. You're just going to spend $150 a head for din-din. That's called exclusive, because it excludes people who can't afford it regularly -- and that's okay too. There's something for everyone.<br/><br/>When I visit another city, I try to appreciate it for what it is and has to offer. I don't try to compare it to my hometown. Otherwise, I might be sorely disappointed on a regular basis. I was born in Rio de Janeiro, a city with more than its fair share of the good, the bad and the ugly -- and the incredibly beautiful! Benchmarking the rest of the world to Rio is unfair, as it is to New York.Ah! This brings me back to th'South Beach I lived in at the turn of the century. I remember one weekend pickin' up 'camerones' off a roadside truck in North Miami Beach, cleaning and steamin' the shrimp (caught that morning) in my studio apt and havin' an impromptu shrimp party with my friends that evening, Good Times...I think the author secretly wants to stay at the Delano.  To recommend (and actually go to)  Joe's Stone Crab and the News Cafe, two of the most over-hyped and at best, mediocre restaurants, shows little insight into the Miami food scene.  Wasn't there a Starbuck's nearby to recommend as well?The least pretentious, most enjoyable travel article I?ve read in NYT. (Except for $225 hotel room.) Our son and his family are moving there. We?ll make use of the suggestions.Going to Miami and So Beach in April  this was timely to readLeisel eliminates all Cuban references from her piece and makes our city a kind of Tennessee Down home, "Alabama Jacks" snake-ridden place.  ??As a transported Miamian in Washington, D.C. I can still counter her Alabama Jacks review.  Liesel's description of Coral Gables as a ?lushly decayed residential neighborhood" couldn't be a worst metaphor for the place.  To the contrary, this historic and enduringly elegant neighborhood is one of Miami?s oldest peopled with families of good name and social standing, and deserving more than a facile glanced over metaphor describing it as "a pastel-stuccoed mirage, an archtectural version of magical realism." As to food she states he states, ?I had never before thought it possuble to find truly execptional fod in Miami Beach proper (not counting Joe?s Stone Crabs) I..I was wrong.  And indeed she is.  Very wrong. She missed places like PRIME 112 On Ocean and 1st, Osteria Del Teatro's exquisite Italian fare on Washington Ave and 14th, De Rodriguez Cuba on Ocean Drive 101-B Ocean. Her ?off the beaten path? article leaves much better options out of print than her poorly chosen places could afford.Thus I challenge Liesel to give iit yet one ore try.  Come discover Miami through an expert  expat Native?s eyes.  I am drafting an itinerary that will open your eyes to world that exists far from the gauche neon lights of South Beach.  Something all together different and original.  You may reach me at opening <a href="mailto:night@gmail.com">night@gmail.com</a>. You've been servedWell good for yoiu Liesl.  You got back to MB and apparently loved every aspect that you encountererd!  What a revelation for us all.  Thanking you we are.<br/><br/>eosWhat is the name of the restaurant with the "shrimp feast on a dock in Coconut Grove"?It's the rare travel writer who gets it right about Miami and Miami Beach. But Liesl Schillinger has done it. As one who grew up in Miami Beach and has spent, oh, two-thirds of my life there and in Miami -- My husband and I live about 90 minutes north now -- I know and love the marvelous, quirky, color-drenched, outrageous, only-in-Miami places and people Ms. Schillinger treasures. Alabama Jacks? I've loved the place for two decades now. Espanola Way? Maybe the best hidden-in-plain-sight street on the Beach. Homestead and Florida City? Wish you could've been here when they still held the Wild Hog Barbecue (fried eggs, grits, and ham with red-eye gravy, beforehand, at a tiny cafe nearby); where else did bare-chested guys climb greased poles and chow down on swamp cabbage slaw? Joe's Stone Crab? Ay, ay, ay, it's grown and grown glitzier over the years, but it's been my favorite eat-out treat since childhood. Thank you, Ms. Schillinger -- finally, someone has seen the real Miami.Thank You, Thank You, Thank You Liesl.<br/><br/>I have lived in Miami now for 42 years and this is truly My Miami. Keep expanding your Miami horizens on your future trips.....there is much more.<br/><br/>(Also know where a good K-Mart is located close to the Beach).<br/><br/>Great JobThe best article I have read about visiting Miami.  As a long time resident we agree that the glitz and glamour is not what Miami is about.   We just came from our second trip this month to the Everglades and Robert is Here (RIH) fruit stand escorting visitors.  Royal Palm visitor center is the heart of park and shows guest what they came to see, alligators and exotic bird life all in one easy walk.  <br/><br/>At RIH we bought ripe mangos, tomatoes, black sapote (chocolate fruit) and the Best papayas on the planet.  Visit the tortoises, goats and birds behind the stand. <br/><br/>RF Orchids nearby  is a nursery and orchid exhibit with showy sprays of flowers like you have never seen.Brownes &amp; Co Apothecary has moved right around the corner, now at 1688 Jefferson ave...even moore boutiquey and beautiful....Joe's is great - but some of its chauvinistic throwbacks need to be replaced by more enlightened approaches. If you've been there, you know what I mean.  Heading to Miami in a couple of weeks with the kids - hope to validate your choices. Sounds like you had a good time but curious to know why you left out Lil HavanaWhat a delicious read! More please!Liesl, you did a great job for tourists who come to South Beach where i live, just off Espanola. One truth about South Beach is its size. It is one mile wide (a ten minute walk from Ocean to West) and two miles long. I came here for the weather and for the need to walk, once I was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes--many come here for the same reasons. <br/><br/>For a long time I lived at the Del Rio Condo right in the middle of the hoopla, on 11th and Collins. Over my years here, that building has truly decayed. The odd thing about South Beach is the way it declines and revives and declines once again. Many apartment buildings are moving to one side or the other. <br/><br/>As a tourist you seem awfully wise ( and do not forget that Lincoln Avenue is now like Fifth or Madison in the sun.) But living here is to encounter the weirdest kind of vibes. Sometimes when at 11th and Collins it is just all noise all night.  <br/><br/>But what continues to keep me here is that off the beaten track (see above) there are parts of South Beach that are like the suburbs and many  apartments are really inexpensive and very many have 'For Rent' signs. The weather is sublime and one can venture outside of SB though few I know do.<br/><br/>And let me put in a great word about culture: The Miami Beach Cinemateque, 11th-12th on Washington is a treasure of art films. Also, the local "Books and Books" is right on Linoln and those people really read a lot. Plus the grand New Symphony is operatve now. There are better and least expensive cuban restaurants than Puerto Sagua in Coral Way  in Coral Gables, on Biscyne blvd.,  and on Calle 8. This applies also to italian restaurants, there are some very good ones in Downtown and near Mary Brickell Village. For burgers go to Tabacco Roald and for hot dogs, Dogma in Biscayne Blvd. For pizza, several places, one close to Dogma, an old gas station converted to an italian rest. Thes place are excellent and economical.What a fun article.  I grew up in that Miami in the 1970s and have great memories of field trips to the Anhinga trail, Camping in the keys and snorkeling at Pennekamp and  my high school senior party at the Venetian pool.  I do recommend to the author journeying further south in the keys (try Bahia Honda State Park) and of course Key West.  <br/><br/>Thanks for the memories.As luck would have it, my son and daughter-in-law are in Miami right now! I sent this article to them and hope they will be able to follow some of your advice. Thanks for an amusing and informative article. This was such a fun read.  I would love to tag along on your next trip.  Maybe I can talk my sister into reenacting this adventure.  I loved it all. Thanks.This is the Miami I knew and loved long before the hipsters took over.  After living there for forty-plus years, the last 6 of which were spent immersed in the weirdness of South Beach, I traded the snorkeling in the Keys, the fresh fruit of Robert Is Here, the alligators and the stone crabs, for the peace and traffic-free beauty of the mountains of NC.  Loved the article -- it brought back all the good stuff I remember, while reminding me why I left. This is such an authentic list I despair that my favorite spots are going to get taken over. My wife and I enjoyed these places when we lived in Miami and the Keys. The only additions to this perfect list can be found on Andrew Zimmern's show about Miami, juice bars in Hialeah, and other micro- South American community restaurants in the Miami area that we never discovered. And the Hogfish Grill on Stock Island, a few miles from Key West where shrimp boats not yachts provide the ambiance. Thanks from a native. The most popular souvenirs I have given northern friends are t shirts from the Everglades Alligator Farm which say "bite me". Having lived in south west Miami in the late 1960's, I've always had a moderate yen to return to the easy and pretty life, however I did not know where I wanted to go.  This wonderful travellogue painted a picture in words of Miami today, so different than the Miami I remember.  It makes me want to return today to a place different but way more exotic than the Miami I remember.  The Brazilian Pool, Vizcaya, and Shorty's Ribs (on the corner of So. Kendall Drive and U.S. Highway #1 in south west Miami bring back warm memories.  Having read this article I now can't wait to return, not to see the blue haired older ladies with stockings rolled down to their ankles sitting on benches and yapping or to the mall at Dadeland, but to the Miami now alive with color and magic.  Coral Gables was regal, and Coconut Grove was intense, but Key Largo was just divine.  I just made a plane reservation and Miami, her I come, older and hopefully wiser, and ready to inhale it all, thanks to you for having written this glowing article.You're right about most, if not all of the spots on your list.  However, I'd like to offer a couple more suggestions:<br/><br/>Taptap - A Haitian restaurant on Miami Beach and where I bring all tourists.  Cheap and tasty.  Theoretically one of the best mojitos in Miami.  (I wouldn't dare to render an opinion.)<br/><br/>Cuban food.- Every tourist should eat "Cuban" food at least once during their stay.  If you want to people watch - choose Versailles on Calle 8.  If you prefer a good meal, then Las Vegas is the better bet.   Robert is Here does indeed make wonderful smoothies (I always go for the mango shake) near the annual orchid show.  Gianni Versace breakfasted at News Cafe before walking home to be shot.   Anhingas are not diving birds in the sense of a pelican's crash dive, they swim underwater looking for a fish.  Espa?ola Way is indeed a relaxing pedestrian way.   If the writer did arrive on Super Bowl Sunday, that's the one day a year she should have headed to Joe's Stone Crab: no waiting at all (I may regret posting that). <br/><br/>The timeline?: Lincoln Road's revival began by at least 1980, supercharged by Miami City Ballet's dance studio (inside showroom windows collecting nose prints) in 1986, but now overrun by chain stores and food factories.  I suspect the very self-impressed City Beautiful ( Coral Gables) will consult an expensive city law firm about how best to respond indignantly to being characterized as a "lushly decayed residential neighborhood".<br/><br/>Dunno about the vultures but at Shark Valley signs warn that the crows are smart enough to open the packs you leave on your bicycle at the observation tower.<br/><br/>Saturday I visited one of those "warehouses in the Wynwood District" (which is NOT downtown Miami), saw a magnificent personal collection on loan from Portugal.<br/><br/>The airboat photo appears staged.  I don't know but I've been told, those passengers need earplugs: engine noise is so loud there is zero chance of hearing a single word spoken by anyone including the so-called guide.  