An Energy Coup for Japan: 'Flammable Ice' By HIROKO TABUCHI TOKYO --
Japan said Tuesday that it had extracted gas from offshore deposits
of methane hydrate -- sometimes called "flammable ice" -- a
breakthrough that officials and experts said could be a step toward
tapping a promising but still little-understood energy source. The
gas, whose extraction from the undersea hydrate reservoir was
thought to be a world first, could provide an alternative source of
energy to known oil and gas reserves. That could be crucial
especially for Japan, which is the world's biggest importer of
liquefied natural gas and is engaged in a public debate about
whether to resume the country's heavy reliance on nuclear power.
Experts estimate that the carbon found in gas hydrates worldwide
totals at least twice the amount of carbon in all of the earth's
other fossil fuels, making it a potential game-changer for
energy-poor countries like Japan. Researchers had already
successfully extracted gas from onshore methane hydrate reservoirs,
but not from beneath the seabed, where much of the world's deposits
are thought to lie. The exact properties of undersea hydrates and
how they might affect the environment are still poorly understood,
given that methane is a greenhouse gas. Japan has invested hundreds
of millions of dollars since the early 2000s to explore offshore
methane hydrate reserves in both the Pacific and the Sea of Japan.
That task has become all the more pressing after the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear crisis, which has all but halted Japan's nuclear
energy program and caused a sharp increase in the country's fossil
fuel imports. Japan's rising energy bill has weighed heavily on its
economy, helping to push it to a trade deficit and reducing the
benefits of the recently weaker yen to Japanese exporters. The
Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry said a team aboard
the scientific drilling ship Chikyu had started a trial extraction
of gas from a layer of methane hydrates about 300 meters, or 1,000
feet, below the seabed Tuesday morning. The ship has been drilling
since January in an area of the Pacific about 1,000 meters deep and
80 kilometers, or 50 miles, south of the Atsumi Peninsula in central
Japan. With specialized equipment, the team drilled into and then
lowered the pressure in the undersea methane hydrate reserve,
causing the methane and ice to separate. It then piped the natural
gas to the surface, the ministry said in a statement. Hours later, a
flare on the ship's stern showed that gas was being produced, the
ministry said. "Japan could finally have an energy source to call
its own," said Takami Kawamoto, a spokesman for the Japan Oil, Gas
and Metals National Corporation, or Jogmec, the state-run company
leading the trial extraction. The team will continue the trial
extraction for about two weeks before analyzing how much gas has
been produced, Jogmec said. Japan hopes to make the extraction
technology commercially viable in about five years. "This is the
world's first trial production of gas from oceanic methane hydrates,
and I hope we will be able to confirm stable gas production,"
Toshimitsu Motegi, the Japanese trade minister, said at a news
conference in Tokyo. He acknowledged that the extraction process
would still face technical hurdles and other problems. Still, "shale
gas was considered technologically difficult to extract but is now
produced on a large scale," he said. "By tackling these challenges
one by one, we could soon start tapping the resources that surround
Japan." It is unclear how much the tapping of methane hydrate would
affect Japan's emissions or global warming. On one hand, natural gas
would provide a cleaner alternative to coal, which still provides
Japan with a fifth of its primary energy needs. But new energy
sources could also prompt Japan to slow its development of renewable
energies or green technologies, hurting its emissions in the long
run. Any accidental release of large amounts of methane during the
extraction process would also be harmful. Jogmec estimates that the
surrounding area in the Nankai submarine trough holds at least 1.1
trillion cubic meters, or 39 trillion cubic feet, of methane
hydrate, enough to meet 11 years' worth of gas imports to Japan. A
separate rough estimate by the National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology has put the total amount of
methane hydrate in the waters surrounding Japan at more than 7
trillion cubic meters, or what researchers have long said is closer
to 100 years' worth of Japan's natural gas needs. "Now we know that
extraction is possible," said Mikio Satoh, a senior researcher in
marine geology at the institute who was not involved in the Nankai
trough expedition. "The next step is to see how far Japan can get
costs down to make the technology economically viable." Methane
hydrate is a sherbetlike substance that can form when methane gas is
trapped in ice below the seabed or underground. Though it looks like
ice, it burns when it is heated. Experts say there are abundant
deposits of gas hydrates in the seabed and in some Arctic regions.
Japan, together with Canada, has already succeeded in extracting gas
from methane hydrate trapped in permafrost soil. American
researchers are carrying out similar test projects on the North
Slope of Alaska. The difficulty had long been how to extract gas
from the methane hydrate far below the seabed, where much of the
deposits lie. In onshore tests, Japanese researchers explored using
hot water to warm the methane hydrate, and tried lowering pressure
to free the methane molecules. Japan decided to use
depressurization, partly because pumping warm water under the seabed
would itself require a lot of energy. "Gas hydrates have always been
seen as a potentially vast energy source, but the question was, how
do we extract gas from under the ocean?" said Ryo Matsumoto, a
professor in geology at Meiji University in Tokyo who has led
research into Japan's hydrate deposits. "Now we've cleared one big
hurdle." According to the United States Geological Survey, recent
mapping off the North Carolina and South Carolina coasts shows large
offshore accumulations of methane hydrates. Canada, China, Norway
and the United States are also exploring hydrate deposits.
Scientists at the geological survey note, however, that there is
still a limited understanding of how drilling for hydrates might
affect the environment, particularly the possible release of methane
into the atmosphere, and are calling for continued research and
monitoring. This article has been revised to reflect the following
correction: Correction: March 12, 2013

An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a
spokesman for Jogmec. He is Takami Kawamoto, not Kawatomo.

