Ikea Withdraws Meatballs After Horse Meat Is Found By STEPHEN CASTLE LONDON -- The
escalating crisis over horse meat in beef products in Europe claimed another big
retail victim Monday when the Swedish furniture giant, Ikea, withdrew meatballs
from sale in 14 European countries. The retailer said it had removed some products
from its stores in Sweden after the authorities in the Czech Republic detected
horse meat in Ikea meatballs. The company said it had made the decision even
though its own tests two weeks ago had not detected horse DNA. Ikea also announced
that it was stopping sales "of the concerned batch" of meatballs in Slovakia, the
Czech Republic, Hungary, France, Britain, Portugal, Italy, Netherlands, Belgium,
Spain, Greece, Cyprus and Ireland. "We are now initiating further tests on the
same production batch in which the Czech Republic authorities found indications of
horse meat," Ikea added in a statement. It said results were expected in the
coming days. "We do not tolerate any other ingredients than the ones stipulated in
our recipes or specifications, secured through set standards, certifications and
product analysis by accredited laboratories," the statement said. A traditional
part of Swedish cuisine, meatballs are consumed in large quantities by customers
in Ikea's in-store cafeterias, and are also offered, frozen, for sale in Ikea's
in-store food shops for customers to take home. The discovery came as European
Union ministers were meeting in Brussels to discuss how to contain a crisis that
began last month in Ireland, spread quickly to Britain, and has now expanded
steadily across the Continent. Around a dozen countries have now been affected,
and the scandal has drawn attention to the problems of policing a complex supply
chain for processed food in Europe. The European Union introduced strict
traceability laws for fresh beef after the outbreak of mad cow disease in the
1990's. Similar controls are not in place for processed meat products. While
pressure for stricter rules is growing, some European nations worry that this
could produce an unwieldy and impractical system. In the meantime, European
nations have stepped up DNA tests of meat products to determine their provenance,
and these are producing more unwelcome discoveries every week. Last week Nestle,
one of the best-known food companies in the world, said it was removing pasta
meals from store shelves in Italy and Spain. Already most of the big supermarket
chains in Britain have withdrawn products, including millions of hamburgers. Last
week, local authorities in Scotland were urged by a procurement agency not to use
current stocks of frozen beef products, following the discovery of traces of horse
DNA in a frozen burger taken from a Scottish school kitchen.

